Microsoft Game Studios/Digital Anvil - 23rd October 2003.

Hello Folks!

Welcome to the Extra Bonus Assets section of this product.  We've
brought together even more material as we approached our DVD shipping
deadline.  Here is a brief description.

Note - plenty of the files have their original creation date - preserved all
these years!  Microsoft Word is required to read DOC files.  Various video
codecs are in use, including DivX and Indeo, and Windows Media - check the
Summary tab of each file's Properties if you can't play the file.

NOTE - these doc(s) are for your reading enjoyment only, and are
supplied "as is."

Regards,

Martin Galway
Audio Lead, "Freelancer"

Curtis Neal,
Video Editor/DVD Author

- - - - -


⦁	1) Scripts

There were numerous versions of the single-player story for "Freelancer."  The
one that ships in the game was begun around March of 2001 and was tweaked until
the end of 2002.  Included here are the first and final drafts.
	I've called it the "shooting script" because it underwent a minor amount
of tweaking as we created the final product, but otherwise, it's pretty darn
close to what shipped.  It's definitely what we used going into production.
This large file merges all 13 mission scripts with the planetside/base-side
story script (that was written & recorded first to allow production to begin on
the real-time cinematics).


⦁	2) Intro Storyboards

Hollywood storyboard artist Marc Baird was brought in by Chris Roberts to 'board the
extravagant intro sequence, in 1998/1999.  Here are some of his storyboards.  After
watching the intro in its full glory on this DVD, you'll be able to understand the
storyboards better.

The intro was created by Digital Anvil's visual effects team (after finishing the
Wing Commander movie) during 1999, and the 5.1 soundtrack was created by Soundelux
DMG in Hollywood, in February 2000.

The anonymous narrator role, who in this DVD product is revealed as the character
of "Atticus Rockford", was performed by actor Xander Berkeley - who ALSO performs the
roles of Sam Lonnigan and Dexter Hovis later in the game (a pretty varied set of
performances there!).

You can browse through the images and get some idea of the original thoughts behind
each shot.  OR use the Windows Media 9 file Curtis Neal created, to allow you to get
through them all in about two minutes.  Some of the storyboards may relate to
discarded ideas, so take them as they are.


⦁	3) Early music examples

I've included the earliest music we put into the game - from the Chris Roberts era.
The early music had an optimistic, "sea-going voyage" orchestral type of feel.  We
replaced it with a more modern, more sinister pseudo-electronic score in 2002
once the final character of the game was more evident.  Note - the "spotting" of
the music was also different back then - for example, a 2-minute piece for all
Liberty cityscapes, versus what we have now, which is one 20-second piece for each
planetscape (in the case of Liberty, there are six).  The early music was composed
by Visual Music's Dean Grindsfelder (Liberty & Pirates), Cato (Rheinland) and Osamu
Kitajima (Kusari - Osamu's only music in the shipping game is the suite of
planetscape tunes in Kusari).


⦁	4 Extra music not on the CD

I've included the music for bars - mostly by Andrew Sega, but some by Tom Seufert of
Visual Music (which is the earliest music in the game that survived until the present
day).  Use Windows Media Player 6.4 for perfect looping of these WAVs. (in your
Program Files folder)


⦁	5 Movie tests/examples

We've included AVIs rendered out over the years, from ads & placards used in the
cityscapes, to artists' impressions of what the game will look like (DREAD.AVI,
hud_ideas.avi) to news broadcast visuals, that play underneath newsreader dialogue
(example - if it's a news clip about a new way to transport "solar gas" - the file
s37 solar gas.avi would be used).  There are also concepts for heads-up displays
in the game, ways to get your ship repaired, ways to get YOU repaired, etc..  As
you probably know, not all ideas, including the news clips, were used in the final
game.  


⦁	6) Freelancer Story Character Vignettes

Jorg Neumann and Adam Foshko thought it would be cool to pad out the story's
fictional characters in a way that is not included in the story itself - offline,
so to speak.  So they created short speeches for each one, where they describe
themselves.  I can tell you, the actors enjoyed reading these vignettes probably
the most out of all their dialogue!  The vignettes are not 100% serious - there's
a bit of between-the-lines humour in each one.


⦁	7) Intro Concept Art

We had concept artist Craig Mullens paint some magnificent pictures of events in
the intro story - colonists climbing into their sleeping pods, and the sleeper
ships before they launch.  These are pretty faithfully represented in the final
movie.


- - - - -

Notes on the "fully Authored" DVD assets:


⦁	1) the Original 7-minute pre-rendered intro

This was shown at the 2000 Computer Game Developer's Conference (along with
in-game footage, some of which ended up in the 2001 E3 trailer) to rapturous
applause.  The importance of the Nomads that is inferred from their role in this intro
caused concern for us, as it warrants an early introduction to Nomads in the
story.  The intro movie was completely rendered before the rest of Freelancer's
story had been put together.  Over time, we decided that introducing the Nomads later
in the game was a better idea, and so we "removed" them from the intro - which is why
we have an "Original" intro and a "Release" intro.
	Note - you can use the "audio" button on your DVD remote to change
soundtracks - We've separated out the music, sound-effects and dialogue for those
who want to hear them separately.  Assignments are as follows:
		Audio Soundtrack 1 (default) = mix
		Audio Soundtrack 2 = fx
		Audio Soundtrack 3 = music
		Audio Soundtrack 4 = dialogue


⦁	2) the Release version of the pre-rendered intro

This is the version that ships with the game - but it has the 5.1 soundmix applied,
and of course the picture is "DVD quality." (The Release version on the game CD
had a 2.0-channel sound mix and used the Windows Media 7 codec.)


⦁	3) the "restored RTC intro"

In early versions of the game, the intro sequences continued for a total of 11 minutes,
which we deemed too long to get players into the action; therefore we removed
this section from the game.  It was to have played in between the pre-rendered intro
and the Freeport Seven Disaster sequence.  Here it is, restored for your viewing
pleasure, now pre-rendered at NTSC resolution with 16x anti-aliasing.  Note - the
soundtrack is a temp track specially-created for this DVD - the sequence was cut from
the game before any final music and sound-effects were done.  This intro is of
particular interest to anyone wondering where that egg-shaped "artifact" came from.


⦁	4) trailers

These are the only trailers we produced for the game.  The 2001 trailer was created by
Digital Anvil's video editor Curtis Neal and Project Lead Phil Wattenbarger, and
features music by James Hannigan.  The 2002 trailer started life as an "unofficial,
underground trailer" by RTC editor Ray Barerra.  Phil Wattenbarger liked it so much
that it became the official trailer for E3 that year - after getting music from James
Hannigan and Mat Mitchell.  The "web trailer" was put together around the time of the
release of the game, by Curtis Neal.


⦁	5) Concept Art

We included many sketches from 1997/1998/1999 and you can see that we had many ideas on
how and where to take the characters in the game.  Adam Medhurst was Freelancer's Art
Director back then.  The Nomads underwent the largest changes of all from concept to
release; they are not portrayed "walking around" in the released game, though we
considered the concept.

- - - - -

Notes on the Music CD:

Freelancer Music CD 10/22/2003 - Track information			

Performed By James Hannigan, Tom Seufert, Dean Grinsfelder, Osamu Kitajima, Cato, and Tim Kelly.			
			
Digitally Edited And Mastered By Martin Galway			

Track	length	composer	title/details
1	04:04	Dean Grinsfelder, L.A.			Space Suite - Liberty
								Exploration, Danger, Battle
			
2	04:10	Dean Grinsfelder, L.A.			Space Suite - Bretonia
								Exploration, Danger, Battle
			
3	04:10	Cato, L.A.					Space Suite - Rheinland
								Exploration, Danger, Battle
			
4	06:02	Cato, L.A.					Space Suite - Kusari
								Exploration, Danger, Battle, Tekagi's Arch*
								* bonus music, not in game - original concept was for this to surround
								Tekagi's Base in Mission 09.  We ran out of time to implement it.
			
5	04:03	Tim Kelly, L.A.				Space Suite - Omega
								Exploration, Danger, Battle
			
6	04:09	Tim Kelly, L.A.				Space Suite - Omicron
								Exploration, Danger, Battle
			
7	04:25	Tom Seufert, L.A.				Space Suite - Sigma
 								Exploration, Danger, Battle
			
8	04:06	Tim Kelly, L.A.				Space Suite - Tau
								Exploration, Danger, Battle
			
9	04:12	Tom Seufert, L.A.				Space Suite - Independent Worlds
								Exploration, Danger, Battle
			
10	06:56	various, L.A.				Planetscapes Suite
								California Minor, Denver, Houston, Los Angeles, Manhattan, Pittsburgh,
								New London, Cambridge, Leeds, Hamburg, New Berlin, Stuttgart, Vogtland,
								Honshu, Kyushu, New Tokyo, Cadiz, Crete, Malta, Kurile, Harris
			
11	05:00	James Hannigan, London			Emotions #1
								Comedy, Anticipation, Foreboding, Challenge
			
12	04:17	James Hannigan, London			Emotions #2
								wonderment, encouragement, psychosis, corruption, revealing
			
13	03:22	James Hannigan, London			Emotions #3
								solemnity, danger, exposition, mystery, failure, death
			
14	06:45	James Hannigan, London			Races+Battles
								Bretonian Race Against Dexter, Battling The Nomads
			
15	02:54	James Hannigan, London			Finale
								Victory, Final Nomad Battle
			
